An octopus is a cephalopod: A group of animals which do not have backbones.
Similar to clams, an octopus is a mollusc, in the order ‘Octopoda’. The order Octopoda contains around 300 different species.
Depending on the species, octopuses can be found in various depths of the ocean. The dumbo octopus is a species that can be found as deep as one mile underwater.
The word "octopus" comes from the Greek: "oktō" meaning "eight" and "pous" meaning "foot".
Octopuses have three hearts and their blood is blue due to being copper-based.
Octopuses are considered to be the most intelligent of all invertebrates. They have been known to use tools, open jars, complete mazes, and even recognise individual human faces.
An octopus’s arms are lined with hundreds of suckers. They use these suckers to grab and hold things. The suckers are incredibly strong; The suckers on a Giant Pacific octopus for example can hold 35lbs each.
An octopus’s skin contains thousands of specialized cells that allow them to change color. Changing color helps them to camouflage into their surroundings to avoid danger. These cells are called chromatophores, and each chromatophore has a sac at the center which is filled with pigments of red, yellow, black, or brown. They can change color in less than 30milliseconds.
Depending on the species, octopuses come in various sizes, from one inch to 30ft long.
Octopuses have quite short lifespans. Depending on the species, some octopuses can live to be three or four years old, whereas smaller species can only live for six months or one year.
Bored octopuses will often eat their own arms. This is called autophagy.
An octopus’s arms are not to be mistaken for tentacles. Most octopuses have eight arms and no tentacles, whereas most cuttlefish and squid will have eight arms and two tentacles. Here is how you can tell the difference: If the invertebrate structure has suckers only at the tip, it is a tentacle, if it has suckers along the whole length, it is an arm.
An octopus will release a dark colored ink to protect itself when it feels in danger. The cloud of ink confuses predators and hides the octopus while it makes a quick getaway.
An octopus’s mouth is below the arms and is a hard, sharp beak.
Octopuses are only found in saltwater.
An octopus can regrow its arms, without any loss of function.
To reproduce, the male will use one of its arms to insert a sperm sac into the female. This arm is extra long, which allows the male to keep a distance during the mating process. This is an adaptation that has occurred due to females often killing and eating the males during or after mating.
A Giant Pacific octopus can weigh more than 600lbs.
Octopuses not only have the ability to change color, they can also change their skin’s texture, too. Using small regions in their skin known as papillae, which contract and draw soft tissue to the surface, the octopus can blend in better with corals and rocks.
Female octopuses can lay up to around 100,000 eggs. She will often die shortly after the eggs hatch.